---
title: "Journalism, media, and technology trends and predictions 2025"
source: "https://reutersinstitute.politics.ox.ac.uk/journalism-media-and-technology-trends-and-predictions-2025"
author:
  - "[[Reuters Institute]]"
published: 2025-01-09
created: 2025-04-11
description: "Our annual survey of over 300 media leaders from across the world explores publishers' priorities for the year ahead, the challenges they envision and how well equipped they are to address them."
tags:
  - "Info-Media"
---
Executive Summary News organisations are braced for multiple challenges in 2025 that will likely include further attacks from hostile politicians, continued economic headwinds, and battles to protect intellectual property in the face of rapacious AI-driven platforms. Changes to search, in particular, will become a major grievance for a news industry that has already lost social traffic	and	fears	a	further	decline	in	visibility	as	AI	interfaces	start	to	generate	‘story	like’	answers to news queries. The US election also highlighted the growing power of an alternative news ecosystem that includes partisan personalities and creators that often operate outside journalistic norms, and some say have now eclipsed the mainstream media in terms of both influence	and	trust. Despite	these	difficulties	many	traditional	news	organisations	remain	optimistic	about	the	year	ahead – if not about journalism itself. Uncertain times tend to be good for business and the prospect	of	‘Trump	unleashed’1	could	lead	to	a	surge	in	web	traffic	and	even	in	subscriptions.	But this is by no means guaranteed. One key challenge will be to re-engage audiences that have fallen	out	of	the	habit	of	consuming	news	over	recent	years	and	to	find	ways	of	attracting	the	next generation. Many publishers will be looking to dramatically upscale the quality of their own websites, create more personalised news experiences, and invest further in audio and video. With consumer expectations moving at a rapid pace, embracing change while staying true to core journalistic values will be the key balancing trick for the year ahead. How media leaders view the year ahead These	are	the	main	findings	from	our	industry	survey,	drawn	from	a	strategic	sample	of	326	digital leaders from 51 countries and territories. • Just four in ten (41%) of our sample of editors, CEOs, and digital executives say they are	confident	about	the	prospects	for	journalism	in	the	year	ahead,	with	one	in	six	(17%)	expressing	low	confidence.	Stated	concerns	relate	to	political	polarisation,	a	rise	in attacks on the press, and media capture – all of which in combination are seen as significant	threats	to	journalism’s	ability	to	operate	freely.	• More	positively,	just	over	half	(56%)	say	they	are	confident	about	their	own	business	prospects,	a	significant	jump	on	last	year’s	figure.	Many	publishers	expect	traffic	boosts	amid the expected chaos of a second Trump presidency, others report continuing growth in online subscriptions, while others still think that the rapid growth of unreliable AIgenerated content could bring audiences back to trusted media. • Meanwhile, around three-quarters (74%) of our survey respondents say they are worried about	a	potential	decline	in	referral	traffic	from	search	engines	this	year.	Data	sourced	for	this	report	from	analytics	provider	Chartbeat	shows	that	aggregate	traffic	to	hundreds	of	news sites from Google search remains stable for now but publishers fear the extension of 1 Sewell	Chan,	‘Prospects	for	Journalism	in	a	Second	Trump	Term’,	Nouvelles	Pratiques	du	Journalisme	Conference,	Sciences	Po,	Paris, 3 December 2024. 3THE REUTERS INSTITUTE FOR THE STUDY OF JOURNALISM AI-generated summaries to important news stories. This comes after big falls in referral traffic	to	news	sites	from	Facebook	(67%)	and	Twitter	(50%)	over	the	last	two	years.2 • In response to these trends, publishers will be putting more effort this year into building relationships with AI platforms (+56 net score3) such as ChatGPT and Perplexity, both of which have been courting high-quality content in return for citations and/or money. With consumer attention switching to video, more publisher effort is also being planned for YouTube (+52) and TikTok (+48) – despite a possible ban in the United States early in 2025 – as well as Instagram (+43). • By contrast, publisher sentiment towards X/Twitter (-68 net score) has worsened this year following the politicisation of the network under Elon Musk. The Guardian, Dagens Nyheter, and La Vanguardia are amongst those to have stopped posting on the platform, with	Bluesky	(+38)	a	key	beneficiary.	Google	Discover	(+27)	is	becoming	a	more	important	–	if	volatile	–	traffic	source	that	has	become	critical	to	many	news	businesses	over	the	last	year.	Our	survey	finds	publishers	ambivalent	but	also	realistic	about	their	dependence	on	platforms overall, with a similar proportion looking to cut ties (31%) as strengthen them (31%). Most of the rest (36%), are planning to maintain ties at existing levels. • On the business side, almost four in ten (36%) of our commercial publishers expect licensing	income	from	tech	and	AI	companies	to	be	a	significant	revenue	stream	–	twice as many as last year. But the amount and structure of any deals remain a point of contention. The majority of our survey respondents (72%) said they would prefer to see collective	deals	that	benefited	the	whole	industry	rather	than	each	company	negotiating	in their self-interest (19%), which is mostly what has been happening. A further 6% say they would rather not enter into any deals. • More widely, subscription and membership remain the biggest revenue focus (77%) for publishers, ahead of both display (69%) and native advertising (59%). The majority are now	relying	on	three	or	four	different	revenue	streams,	including	events	(48%),	affiliate	revenue (29%), donations (19%), and related businesses (15%). • With subscription growth slowing, new product development is set to be a more important priority in the year ahead. More than a quarter of our publisher respondents say they are actively thinking about or planning to launch new products around games (29%)	or	education	(26%)	with	one-fifth	(20%)	looking	to	launch	an	international	or	foreign language version. Many of these new products are likely to be bundled into ‘allaccess’	subscriptions	in	a	bid	to	reduce	churn.	At	the	same	time	more	than	four	in	ten	(42%)	say	they’ll	be	looking	to	launch	or	trial	a	‘youth’	product	this	year.	• Meanwhile	news	organisations’	use	of	AI	technologies	continues	to	increase	across	all	categories, with back-end automation (60%) considered very important by publisher respondents,	many	of	whom	have	rolled	out	AI	toolkits	to	support	new	workflows	this year. The vast majority (87%) say that newsrooms are being fully or somewhat transformed by Gen AI, with just 13% saying not so much or not at all. 2 Data based on the number of page view referrals in aggregated to hundreds of news websites and apps in the Chartbeat network. 3 Net	score	is	the	percentage	point	difference	between	the	proportion	that	responded	with	‘less	effort’	and	‘more	effort’. 4JOURNALISM AND TECHNOLOGY TRENDS AND PREDICTIONS 2025 • Audience-facing uses of AI are likely to proliferate in 2025 with publishers leaning into format personalisation as a way of increasing engagement. In our survey the majority said they would be actively exploring features that turn text articles into audio (75%), provide AI summaries at the top of stories (70%), or translate news articles into different languages (65%). Over half (56%) of respondents said they would be looking into AI chatbots and search interfaces. Not all these experiments will make it into full production but the direction of travel is clear. • More widely, respondents expect to see tech platforms developing and promoting their AI	agents	this	year	–	many	coming	with	improved	conversational	interfaces.	OpenAI’s	ChatGPT now comes with advanced voice features and both Siri and Alexa are getting an upgrade.	Around	one-fifth	(20%)	think	these	interfaces	will	be	the	‘next	big	thing’,	with	half	(51%)	expecting	more	of	a	‘slow	burn’	impact.	• Publishers	are	in	two	minds	about	whether	the	trends	towards	influencers	and	creators	is good or bad for journalism. Around a quarter (27%) take a negative view, worrying that institutional news reporting could get squeezed out, but others (28%) are more positive, feeling that there is much that news organisations can learn in terms of storytelling creativity and building communities. • Linked to the above, some publishers worry about losing their editorial stars in a more personality-led ecosystem. But a bigger concern is around attracting and retaining talent in product and design (38%), data-science (52%), and engineering (55%) at a time when new product development is becoming more important than ever. Words and phrases we could be hearing more of in 2025 … AI Slop [/ ai slɔp /’] noun Def: Sometimes also simply slop. Low-quality media – including writing and images – made using Generative AI technologies. Widely used in newspaper headlines warning of dangers of slop compared to the value of journalism. Brain Rot [/ˈbrein rɔt /] noun Def: Supposed deterioration of a person’s mental or intellectual state, as the result of overconsumption of material (esp. online) considered  to be trivial or unchallenging. Oxford University Press word of 2024. Agentic [/əˈd͡ʒɛn.tɪk/] adjective Def: Able to express agency on one’s own behalf or that of another. Will increasingly be used this year in the context of Gen AI agents that exercise control by anticipating our needs. Influencer [/influɛncɛr’] noun Def: A person who is able to influence consumption, lifestyle or political preferences of online audiences by creating engaging content on social media. Often used disparagingly by journalists in the context of news The remainder of this report is divided into nine themes or chapters with a discussion of each followed	by	some	more	specific	predictions	about	what	might	happen	in	2025. 2 5THE REUTERS INSTITUTE FOR THE STUDY OF JOURNALISM 1. Journalism Embattled But Unbowed While	many	publishers	have	confidence	in	their	own	news	organisations,	this	year’s	survey	shows	an	alarming	decline	in	confidence	in	journalism in just a few short years. Only four in ten (41%)	say	they	are	confident,	down	19pp	from	the	figure	in	our	2022	poll.	The	proportion	that	says	they	are	not	confident	has	risen	from	10%	to	17%	over	the	same	period. Just four in ten media leaders are confident about the future of journalism in 2025 Just four in ten are confident about the future of journalism Data from a survey of 326 media leaders in 51 countries for 'Journalism, media and technology trends and predictions 2025'. Confident Neutral Notconfident 2022 60% 30% 41% 10% 2025 42% Q2. To what extent are you confident about journalism’s prospects in the year ahead? Base 2022= 246, 2025=326 17% Q2. To what extent are you confident about journalism’s prospects in the year ahead? Base: 2022 = 246, 2025 = 325. Source: 'Journalism, media and technology trends and predictions 2025'. It’s	not	difficult	to	see	why	this	is	happening.	Across	the	world	–	and	especially	in	societies	that	have become increasingly polarised – prominent politicians have been attacking or looking to undermine independent journalists, scrutinising their actions with threats, lawsuits, or worse. In a growing number of countries existing or new legislation, including national-security type laws, is being used to make it harder or more dangerous for journalists to operate. There is a growing trend in Latin America to pass ‘foreign agent’ types of laws that mirror initiatives from Hungary or Russia. The goal is to crack down on civil society that exposes corruption, reports about organised crime and defends human rights or the environment Jazmín Acuña, Co-founder and Editorial Director, El Surtidor, Paraguay But	it	is	not	just	direct	attacks.	Politicians	are	increasingly	finding	ways	to	bypass	the	media	entirely. In the recent US election, the two main candidates Donald Trump and Kamala Harris largely avoided mainstream news outlets, preferring to use their own channels or talk with alternative	sources	such	as	podcasters	or	YouTubers.	In	Trump’s	case,	key	messages	were	then	amplified	by	a	network	of	social	media	outriders.4	‘The	Trump	victory	has	confirmed	the	media	influence	in	the	public	is	deteriorating	rapidly,	even	more	than	we	thought,’	says	Emilio	Doménech, CEO of Watif in Spain. Increasing influence of individual news creators and podcasters Donald Trump’s appearance on Joe Rogan’s podcast and Kamala Harris’s on Alex Cooper’s Call Her Daddy have highlighted the declining influence of traditional TV channels Donald Trump appearance on Joe Rogan’s podcast and Kamala Harris’s on Alex Cooper’s Call Her Daddy have highlighted the declining influence of traditional TV channels 4 https://www.usermag.co/p/why-democrats-wont-build-their-own 6 5JOURNALISM AND TECHNOLOGY TRENDS AND PREDICTIONS 2025 These tactics have proved particularly effective at engaging those who rarely access (and have low trust in) the established media – and not just in the United States. Calin Georgescu rose from	near	obscurity	to	top	the	poll	in	the	first	round	of	the	Romanian	presidential	election,	fuelled by a combination of populist, anti-establishment rhetoric and a hugely successful social media campaign, principally via TikTok.5 His account showed him horse riding, vigorously exercising, and attending church, and he largely avoided media set pieces such as TV debates. Accusations of foreign (Russian) interference means that the elections will now be rerun but it is	far	from	clear	that	the	result	was	not	a	reflection	of	the	popular	mood. Calin Georgescu connected with voters using direct channels such as TikTok Of	course,	the	undermining	of	the	news	media	doesn’t	just	come	from	politicians:	‘You	are	the	media	now’,	said	Elon	Musk,	suggesting	that	posts	on	his	social	media	platform	are	now	as	credible as content from traditional news outlets. With mainstream media hampered by low trust	and	difficult	economics,	this	chorus	of	criticism	could	prove	hard	to	counter	this	year. The populist/authoritarian headwinds are considerable. They are having a significant impact on both our journalism and our business. We are dependent on the health of our clients and 6 many of our clients are facing significant political and economic pressures. Phil Chetwynd, Global News Director AFP, France Around 2,500 jobs were lost in 2024 in major markets according to Press Gazette, following around 8,000 the previous year. The Wall Street Journal, the Guardian, Daily Mail, Vox, Axios, and the Daily Maverick are just some of the brands affected. Television news faces a year of downsizing around the world as audience attention shifts to streaming platforms. In the United States CNN is braced for hundreds of layoffs and has lost around a third of its audience since the election. Public broadcasters are also struggling to attract audiences for traditional news shows and many also face attacks from mostly right-wing politicians	and	‘defund’	pressure	groups.	In	Switzerland	public	broadcaster	SRG	SSR	is	facing	another referendum which threatens to cuts its funding in half. The BBC is amongst those to have cut staff and key news programmes in 2024. The lack of funding and financial resources for quality, independent journalism … weighs heavily on my mind. I see no signs that this downward trend will improve in the coming year. It’s disheartening to witness such a critical pillar of democracy struggle at a time when its presence and integrity are more needed than ever. Daniel Bramon Batlle, 3Cat, Spain 5 https://www.france24.com/en/live-news/20241128-tiktok-tactics-shake-up-politics-in-romania 7THE REUTERS INSTITUTE FOR THE STUDY OF JOURNALISM Despite this, over half of our survey respondents (56%), many of whom represent richer subscription-based	publishers	in	Northern	Europe	or	the	United	States,	remain	confident	about	More than half of the media leaders surveyed remain confident about their company's prospects in 2025 their business prospects despite the tough economic and political outlook. Confidence in my company’s business prospects Data from a survey of 326 media leaders in 51 countries for 'Journalism, media and technology trends and predictions 2025'. Confident Neutral Notconfident 56% 32% 12% Q3. To what extent are you confident about your company’s business prospects in the year ahead? Base = 326. Source: 'Journalism, media and technology trends and predictions 2025'. Q3. To what extent are you confident about your company’s business prospects in the year ahead? Base 2025 = 326 Sentiment	amongst	publishers,	overall,	remains	defiant,	with	a	strong	belief	that	at	times	of	uncertainty independent journalism will be more important than ever. Persuading audiences  of that in an increasingly hostile and polarised environment will be the key challenge for the year ahead. What may happen this year • Trump steps up attacks on the news media: Donald Trump has threatened to cancel broadcast	licences	of	TV	networks	over	‘unfair’	coverage	and	to	jail	journalists	who	refuse to reveal sources. These threats may not be carried out, but the rhetoric could have a chilling effect on media coverage. Trump is likely to restrict access for mainstream journalists,	potentially	even	in	the	White	House	briefing	room,	and	cosy	up	further	to	supportive	‘alternative’	media.	Federal	funding	to	public	broadcasters	will	be	likely	be		cut	along	with	that	for	non-profits	engaged	in	fact-checking,	which	Trump	considers		to be censorship. • News media get less confrontational: Expect to see a different approach this time round,	with	less	media	outrage	about	Trump’s	lies	and	more	coverage	of	the	impact	of	his policies. The non-endorsement of Kamala Harris by the Washington Post may also be a sign that some owners may not be willing to put their wider commercial interests in	the	firing	line	over	the	next	four	years,	despite	a	wave	of	cancellations	from	digital	subscribers and the resignation of prominent columnists.6 • Trump playbook replayed elsewhere: Populist politicians around the world have taken note and are busy building and incentivising alternative networks to amplify their messages through digital channels. Expect claims of foreign interference (as in Romania, Germany) to become an increasing focus for security services, with more pressure on platforms at election time. 6 https://www.npr.org/2024/10/28/nx-s1-5168416/washington-post-bezos-endorsement-president-cancellations-resignations 8JOURNALISM AND TECHNOLOGY TRENDS AND PREDICTIONS 2025 2. Disruption of Search Poses Existential Challenge In	last	year’s	report	we	showed	how	referral	traffic	to	publishers	from	Facebook	had	collapsed	as	the	network	pulled	back	from	news	and	invested	instead	in	more	‘joyful’	creator	content.	Traffic	from	X	also	fell	significantly	as	Elon	Musk	made	the	network	less	publisher-friendly.	But	now	publishers	are	worried	that	search	traffic	may	be	next	to	fall	as	the	big	players	integrate	AI-generated summaries that could further reduce exposure to news links. Data from the analytics company Chartbeat from almost 2,000 news sites, sourced for this report,	give	a	good	overview	of	the	impact	of	platform	changes.	Aggregate	Facebook	traffic	to news and media properties has declined by two-thirds (67%) in the last two years and traffic	from	X	is	down	by	a	half	(50%).	However,	there	does	not	yet	appear	to	be	any	decline	in	aggregate	traffic	from	Google	Search,	despite	reports	to	the	contrary	by	some	individual	publishers.7 At the same time, Google Discover, a set of personalised news links that are shown via	the	Chrome	browser	on	mobile	devices	and	via	the	Google	app,	has	grown	significantly	over	the	last	year	(+12%)	and	delivers	more	combined	traffic	than	organic	search.	Referral traffic from Facebook to news websites has Referral traffic from Facebook and X has declined sharply Referral traffic from X and Instagram to news websites declined even further in 2024 Number of referrals in millions to news and media websites in the Chartbeat network. has declined even further in 2024 Number of referrals in millions to news and media websites in the Chartbeat network. Tra c from Facebook has declined 67%in the last two years. 27% decline in 2023 Number of referrals in millions to news and media websites in the Chartbeat network. Traffic from X has declined 50%and traffic to Instagram has declined 2000 1500 1000 500 67% decline in 2 years X(formerly Twitter) Instagram 48% decline in 2023 200 Further 31% decline 50% decline in 2 years 150 Further 32% decline in 2024 0 Jan 2023 Apr Jul Oct Jan 2024 Apr Jul Oct Source: Data analytics company Chartbeat using aggregated data from almost 2,000 news and media websites with a high proportion from the United States and Europe. Google search traffic was largely unaffected in aggregate 100 50 0 26% decline in 2 years Jan 2023 Apr Jul Oct Jan 2024 Apr Jul Oct Source: Data analytics company Chartbeat using aggregated data from almost 2,000 news and media websites with a high proportion from the United States and Europe. But search referrals in aggregate so far have not gone down in 2024 Number of referrals in millions to news and media websites in the Chartbeat network. Number of referrals to news and media websites in the Chartbeat network. Total traffic includes search and Discover but not Google News. 8000 6000 4000 2000 0 May 2023 Jul Oct Jan 2024 Apr Google total (incl Discover and Search but not Google News ) Google Discover Google Search (not Google news) Jul Oct Source: Data analytics company Chartbeat using aggregated data from over 2,000 news and media websites with a high proportion from the United States and Europe. Note: Google Discover referrals are included in total Google search but Google News is not. Source: Data analytics company Chartbeat, using aggregated data from 1,899 news and media websites (30% North America, 30% Europe, and 40% rest of the world). Note: Google Discover referrals are included in total Google search but Google News is not. 7 The Sun	(News	UK)	and	Immediate	Media	are	amongst	publishers	to	suggest	that	Google	changes	have	affected	its	site	traffic.	https://uk.themedialeader.com/publishers-say-googles-ai-overviews-have-reduced-traffic-potential/ 9THE REUTERS INSTITUTE FOR THE STUDY OF JOURNALISM Google	was	initially	cautious	in	its	rollout	of	its	‘AI	overview’	feature	(real-time	answers	to	specific	questions)	after	an	early	version	suggested	using	non-toxic	glue	to	make	cheese	stick	to	pizza. So far, queries around important news stories have been largely excluded but publishers worry	that	this	will	change,	turning	multiple	blue	traffic-generating	links	into	a	smaller	number	of	‘citations’.	Google	argues	that	links	within	AI	overviews	deliver	more	click-throughs	than	in	a traditional web listing, though there may be fewer links visible overall. But new competition Most respondent worry about the loss of search traffic this year   (due to AI overviews etc) is	on	the	way	in	the	form	of	OpenAI’s	Search	GPT	and	Perplexity.	These	AI	disrupters	will	feel	less constrained than Google as they combine the power of foundational LLMs (Large Language Models)	with	real-time	indexes	of	information	to	significantly	improve	the	search	experience.	74% of respondents say they are somewhat or extremely worried about the potential decline of referrals from search Q5. To what extent, if at all, is your company worried about possible declines in referral traffic from search engines this year?  Base = 303 9 Q5. To what extent, if at all, is your company worried about possible declines in referral traffic from search engines this year?n=x ChatGPT Search, launched at the end of 2024, gives a sense of where the new landscape may be headed. It draws its results from a range of sources with whom OpenAI has been doing deals. These	include	a	licensing	arrangement	reportedly	worth	around	$250m	over	five	years	with News Corp, which owns brands such as the Wall Street Journal, the New York Post, The Times, and the Sun. 8 Reuters, the AP, Financial Times, and Le Monde have	also	agreed	significant	deals. In this example (right) a query about Syria brings back not	a	‘snippet’	but	an	aggregated	story with citations at the end of each paragraph. Towards the bottom of the article, there is a box containing more conventional blue links. In this arrangement, publishers that have signed deals get preferential treatment. At the same time, the platform	(OpenAI)	benefits	from	credible information that has been checked by journalists. 8 https://pressgazette.co.uk/platforms/news-publisher-ai-deals-lawsuits-openai-google/ 10 10JOURNALISM AND TECHNOLOGY TRENDS AND PREDICTIONS 2025 OpenAI’s	approach	to	try	to	do	deals	with	a	small	number	of	premium	publishers	is	being	mirrored by Apple and Amazon (for its Alexa platform). By contrast, Google has so far chosen	not	to	pay	specifically	for	AI	overviews,	while	X	has	updated	its	terms	of	service	to	allow content posted to its platform to be used without explicit consent or compensation. Other key players such as Perplexity and ProRata, which will be launching its own search engine Gist.ai in early 2025, are offering revenue share options for publishers. But these new-style aggregations are not going to stop with search queries. Perplexity recently	added	a	‘For	You’	page,	a	constantly	updating	personalised	news	service.	An	automated elections results hub was created for the US elections that was hard to distinguish from those on the websites of major news sites. 10 Reuters Institute Trends and Pedictions charts and images 2  11.pdf   1   28/12/2024   4:17 PM Particle is a mobile app that offers real-time summaries of multiple stories in a personalised interface. Links to the originating stories are shown, but below the fold. Grok Stories, now available for free on X, is another automated news service drawn from a combination of user-generated and mainstream media posts. And Boring News takes its inspiration from the Polymarket betting odds, which did a better job of predicting the US election result than most opinion polls, and creates an automated daily audio round up of stories that could affect the markets. New AI aggregators look more like a replacement for the media   Perplexity’s election hub Perplexity’s election hub    Grok.ai: Creating stories from social posts Grok.ai  Creating stories from social posts (and mainstream media) Particle.ai: summarizes multiple sources Particle.ai: summarises multiple sources Grok.ai  Creating stories from social posts (and mainstream media) (and mainstream media)   Boring News: An automated audio news round up   Boring News: An automated audio news round up inspired by the latest odds on Polymarket Boring News: An automated audio news round up inspired by the latest odds on Polymarket inspired by the latest odds on Polymarket 11 11 12 12THE REUTERS INSTITUTE FOR THE STUDY OF JOURNALISM All these automated news services raise existential questions for journalists and news publishers about their role in this new ecosystem. If people can access summaries of the best content for free, why would they click on to publisher websites. Will any money offered by platforms	last?	And	will	it	compensate	for	the	loss	of	traffic?	Then there is the issue of equity. In our survey almost three-quarters of publisher respondents (72%)	said	they	would	prefer	to	see	collective	deals	that	benefited	everybody,	but	that	is	the	opposite of what is currently happening – namely a few side deals with international news agencies and national publishers. However, this strong preference for collective agreements in	the	data	may	simply	reflect	the	fact	that	the	majority	of	publishers	in	our	survey	do	not	Preferred (ideal) approach to licensing deals with AI companies currently have deals and do not feel they are likely to be offered one any time soon. Preferred (ideal) approach to licensing deals with AI companies Data from a survey of 326 media leaders in 51 countries for 'Journalism, media and technology trends and predictions 2025'. Try to negotiate the best deal for my company 19% Press for collective agreements that benefit the whole news ecosystem 72% Don't enter into any deals with AI companies 6% Don't know 4% 0% 25% 50% 75% Q6. Leaving aside your own company’s current position, what attitude do you think the news industry should take to possible licensing deals with AI companies? Choose one. Base = 304. Q6. Leaving aside you r own company’s current position, what attitude do you think the news industry should take to possible licensing deals with AI companies? Choose one. Base = 304. Source: 'Journalism, media and technology trends and predictions 2025'. Rasmus Kleis Nielsen in his Nieman Lab prediction article shows how early deals have favoured large	English-language	publishers	and	suggests	that	there	is	‘zero	transparency’	about	their	nature and value.9 ‘Collective agreements based on nationally or internationally established press organisations should set the proper tone to ensure equitable opportunities for publishers worldwide’,	says	Tai	Nalon,	co-founder	and	executive	director	of	Aos	Fatos	in	Brazil,	where	platforms have signed contracts with international news agencies while ignoring local companies.	‘This	fosters	a	process	of	neo-colonialism	and	erodes	vulnerable	ecosystems,’		she says. Others worry that the current approach to deals is already weakening the position of smaller publishers: ‘I believe the rise of generative AI platforms is exacerbating inequalities between large and small publishers and this could worsen their position further as they face a likely decline	in	search-driven	traffic,’	argues	José	Antonio	Navas,	Head	of	Subscriptions	at	El	Confidencial	in	Spain.	What may happen in 2025? • Push for government help: Expect renewed calls to force platforms to pay proper compensation for the use of their content. One emerging option is a reworking of socalled	‘news	bargaining	codes’	that	were	first	introduced	in	Australia	and	generated	around	A$200m	from	‘designated	platforms’	annually	at	one	stage.	After	Meta	refused	to	9 https://www.niemanlab.org/2024/12/publishers-find-the-ai-era-not-all-that-lucrative/ 12JOURNALISM AND TECHNOLOGY TRENDS AND PREDICTIONS 2025 renew its deals, the Australian government is planning to impose a levy on the biggest social and search platforms that needs to be paid whether news content is used or not. This	so-called	‘news	bargaining	incentive’	allows	platforms	to	offset	the	levy	if	they	do	direct deals with publishers.10 Other countries will be watching with interest, though allocating any spoils across multiple publishers with different expectations and objectives could be a fraught process. • More legal action on the way: Canadian publishers and the New York Times are amongst those seeking damages from OpenAI for using articles without authorisation to train underlying models. The stakes are extremely high if the decision goes against either party, so expect to see this settled out of court or kicked further down the track as negotiations grind on. We can also expect to see cases where publishers (or other plaintiffs) seek compensation or apology for reputational damage. A headline from the BBC was recently	reinterpreted	by	Apple’s	new	AI	systems suggesting, wrongly, that murder suspect Luigi Mangione had shot himself. Apple’s AI has been rewriting news headlines in a misleading way • New collaborative intermediaries emerge: ProRata.ai is one of a number of companies, along with Tollbit and Human Native, that are looking to calculate the contribution of a particular article (or publisher) to an AI-generated summary. In this way it offers a mechanism for smaller (and larger) publishers to be paid or at least to help understand its value. The Financial Times, Fortune, Axel Springer, and The Atlantic have all agreed to license their content to ProRata.ai while Danish publishers are partnering in a collective way	to	ensure	the	whole	ecosystem	benefits.11 Expect to see more intermediaries and new products in this space over the next year. 10 https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2024/dec/13/albanese-rod-sims-facebook-tiktok-meta-google 11 The	Danish	Press	Publications’	Collective	Management	Organisation	(DPCMO)	has	signed	a	Letter	of	Intent	(LOI)	with			ProRata.ai to explore collaborative opportunities: https://via.ritzau.dk/pressemeddelelse/14151330/prorataai-and-dpcmo- sign-loi-to-enhance-content-consent-credit-and-compensation-in-the-age-of-generative-ai 13THE REUTERS INSTITUTE FOR THE STUDY OF JOURNALISM 3. Wider Platform Uncertainties Create New Dilemmas In this fast-moving and uncertain environment, publishers remain ambivalent about their relationship with big tech companies, with around a third (31%) wanting to strengthen ties, the same proportion (31%) wanting to cut them, and just over a third (36%) looking to maintain their current position. News publishers remain conflicted about how to handle their relationship with tech platforms Publishers remain conflicted about how to handle tech platforms Data from a survey of 326 media leaders in 51 countries for 'Journalism, media and technology trends and predictions 2025'. Strongly increase ties 11% Slightly increase ties 20% Maintain current level of ties Slightly reduce platform ties 36% 20% Strongly reduce platform ties 11% Don't know 2% 0% 20% Q8. Which of the following comes closest to your views on platforms? Base= 303 Source: 'Journalism, media and technology trends and predictions 2025'. Q8. Which of the following comes closest to your views on platforms? Base = 303. 40% ‘We	are	in	a	marriage	of	convenience	with	the	platforms,’	says	Louise	Pettersson,	Editor-inChief	at	Sjællandske	Medier,	a	small	regional	publisher	in	Denmark.	‘They	want	to	profit	from	our	unique	content	but	refuse	to	acknowledge	us	for	it,	either	through	traffic	or	payment.	Meta,	in	particular,	is	deeply	problematic.’	Others	see	a	potential	changing	of	the	guard,	which	offers an opportunity to change the terms of trade in a way that is more advantageous for publishers.	‘It’s	a	constant	reshuffle.	While	some	platforms	have	stopped	caring	about	factually	correct information altogether (X), others stay put and new interesting opportunities (some AI platforms)	arise,’	says	Matthias	Streitz,	Head	of	Editorial	Innovation	at	Der	Spiegel. Our survey shows that building relationships with new AI platforms such as OpenAI and Perplexity will be a key priority this year, with a +56 percentage point difference between those who say they will be putting more effort into AI platforms and those saying they will put less effort into them. Others see opportunities in these emerging gateways to forge a more aligned partnership based on trusted information. ‘[Platforms] know fake news is going to be a big problem long-term, so working closer to us, especially if we can deliver engaging, powerful content,	is	going	to	make	a	difference,’	argues	Emilio	Doménech	from	Watif. There’ll	also	be	a	greater	focus	this	year	on	alternative	channels	such	as	WhatsApp	(+39),	LinkedIn (+39), Bluesky (+38), and Google Discover (+27) – which has become the number one source	of	referral	traffic	for	many	publishers.12 At	the	same	time	publisher	respondents	say	they’ll	be	putting	considerably	less	effort	into	Facebook	(-42	net	score),	while	sentiment	towards	X	(-68)	has	significantly	worsened,	with	the	platform widely viewed as becoming less useful for journalists as well as increasingly toxic for 12 https://pressgazette.co.uk/publishers/digital-journalism/google-discover-publishers/ 1415 JOURNALISM AND TECHNOLOGY TRENDS AND PREDICTIONS 2025 the public. ‘Facebook is becoming increasingly irrelevant to us, and we are deeply relieved that we	never	became	dependent	on	traffic	from	Meta,’	notes	Gard	Steiro,	Editor-in-Chief	and	CEO,	VG, Norway. For several years, VG’s	main	strategy	has	been	to	build	a	destination	brand	and	to	prioritise direct relationships. A secondary strategy has been to start to build connections with young people via Snapchat and TikTok. Where publishers plan to put more and less effort in 2025 Net difference between proportion planning to put more effort/less effort into each platform Q7. When it comes to distribution and engagement via third-party platforms, will you be putting more or less effort into the following platforms in the coming year? Base = 302. Video platforms on the rise The other striking aspect of this chart is the extent to which publishers will be investing more in video networks such as YouTube (+52 net score), TikTok (+48), as well as Instagram (+43), which has also been pushing more short-form video through its algorithms. The 2024 Digital News Report showed how extensive consumption on these platforms has been become, especially with younger audiences, as well as how publishers have been losing out to news creators	and	influencers	in	these	networks.	But there are many challenges for publishers looking to invest more in this area. Producing video does not come naturally to many print-based newsrooms and short-form video remains hard	to	monetise,	with	little	opportunity	to	drive	traffic	back	to	websites	or	apps.	An	explosion	of content in networks like TikTok, including automated and synthetic news, will make it even harder for publisher content to stand out this year. Where publishers plan to put more and less effort in 2025 Numbers shown represent news leaders surveyed who say they will put more e ort on each platform, minus those who say they will put less e ort. Data from a surveyof 326 media leaders in 51 countries for 'Journalism, media and technology trends and predictions 2025'. OpenAI, Perplexity etc YouTube TikTok Instagram LinkedIn WhatsApp BlueSky Google Discover Google (Search) Apple News Snapchat Threads Facebook X (formerly Twitter) −75 −50 −25 ±0 +25 +50 +75 +56 +52 +48 +43 +39 +39 +38 +27 +25 −2 −22 −22 −42 −68 Q7.When it comes to distribution and engagement via third - party platforms, will you be putting more or less effort into the following platforms in the coming year?Base = 302 Source:'Journalism, media and technology trends and predictions 2025'. New         AI discovery Video networks Alternative traffic sources Publishers have pretty much given up on these platforms New Net: More Net: LessTHE REUTERS INSTITUTE FOR THE STUDY OF JOURNALISM What may happen in 2025? • More bans and restrictions on social media: TikTok users in the United States could	only	have	a	short	time	left	scrolling	through	their	‘For	You’	pages	after	a	court	ruling upholding legislation demanding a TikTok ban unless Chinese parent company ByteDance sells the app to a non-Chinese company. Closing TikTok in the US would be deeply unpopular with millions of users, would deprive creators of one of their main platforms,	and	have	global	ramifications.	The	situation	remains	fluid,	with	an	appeal	to the Supreme Count pending and with incoming president Donald Trump opposed to a ban after it helped him connect with young voters. TikTok is already proscribed in multiple countries, including India, due to concerns about Chinese government influence	and	potential	impact	on	the	young.	Elsewhere,	expect	more	legislation	aimed	at	restricting access to networks aimed at the youngest groups, following the social media ban	for	under-16s	in	Australia.	Elon	Musk’s	X	could	also	face	more	fines	or	bans13 over its reluctance to take down or properly moderate content. We can expect more tension with Europe after recent controversial statements by Musk about German and UK politics raised concerns about interference in domestic affairs. • Social video explosion: With audiences increasingly appreciating bitesize formats, expect to see more publishers bringing this content into their own websites and apps. The Economist and the BBC are amongst those to have built video carousels into their homepages, while others are embedding vertical videos within stories or commissioning reporter stand-ups for the website in what media commentator Charlie Warzel has termed ‘prestige	TikToks’.14 We’ll see more vertical video carousels this year (The Economist) RISJ Digital News Report 2018 • Bluesky wins over journalists but not the wider public: The X/Twitter clone more than doubled the number of its registered accounts between the middle of September (9 million) and the end of November 2024 (20 million). Many of the new sign-ups were part of	an	‘X-odus’	of	Democrat	supporters,	upset	by	what	they	see	as	Elon	Musk’s	partisan	stewardship as well as those worried about misinformation and extremism on the platform.15 News organisations including the New York Times and Financial Times have also been quick to adopt Bluesky, which offers stronger moderation than X and some have 17 13 https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/c5y06vzk3yjo#:~:text=Brazil’s%20Supreme%20Court%20has%20said,X%2C%20 formerly%20known%20as%20Twitter 14 https://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2024/11/you-are-the-media-now/680602/ 15 https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2023/sep/26/eu-warns-elon-musk-that-twitter-x-must-comply-with-fake-news-laws 16JOURNALISM AND TECHNOLOGY TRENDS AND PREDICTIONS 2025 reported greater engagement on their accounts than with both X and Threads, despite their much larger user bases (611m and 275m respectively). Part of the reason may be the use	of	starter	packs	—	lists	of	accounts	in	a	specific	area	that	can	be	followed	with	a	single	click enabling quick onboarding. Despite the hype, Bluesky is very unlikely to replace X in the short term, but expect it to carve out an important niche in a fragmented and increasingly partisan social media landscape. 17THE REUTERS INSTITUTE FOR THE STUDY OF JOURNALISM 4. Driving Business Growth through Product Innovation The combination of the end of the mass referral model and expected further disruptions from AI is forcing publishers to radically rethink business models. With content of every type and format becoming more abundant than ever, only publishers that stand out from the crowd in terms of quality, relevance, or connection are likely to succeed. All of this points towards a continued shift towards reader-funded models and away from advertising predicated on scale. That	change	has	been	reflected	in	our	survey	for	several	years,	with	subscription	outstripping	advertising as the most important revenue focus for publishers. But as in previous surveys, we f ind	news	organisations	also	looking	to	diversify,	with	most	pursuing	three,	four,	or	even	five	different revenue streams. The biggest expected shift in focus (+16pp) comes from platform funding, likely due to a combination of expected AI deals, existing revenue sharing, as well as fact-checking contracts. Support from philanthropic funds and foundations is also expected to be	a	more	important	source	of	revenue,	reflecting	the	pressures	on	independent	public-interest	17 Reuters Institute Trends and Pdictions charts and images 2+  18.pdf   1   01/01/2025   5:13 PM journalism and fact-checking in many parts of the world (see chapter 1). The proportion of publisher respondents relying on crowdfunding and donations (19%) has also increased over the last few years. Most important publisher revenue streams in 2025 Most important revenue streams in 2025… Subscription and membership continue to be the main focus but most companies combine between two and four revenue streams Subscription and membership continues to be the main focus but most companies combine between two and four revenue streams Subscription/membership (ongoing payments) 77% Display advertising/sponsorship 69% Was 81% in 2020 Native advertising (sponsored content) C M Y CM MY CY CMY K Events (physical & online) Funding from platforms (including AI platforms) E-commerce Support from philanthropic funds/foundations Donations (one-off or recurring consumer donations) Related businesses (e.g. property, jobs, betting) Micropayment (incl. digital wallets) 59% 48% 36% Up 16pp since last year Was 75% in 2020 29% 20% 19% 15% 6% !"#$ %&'(&$)*$+&,$*)--).'/0$1'0'+2-$3,4,/5,$6+3,276$23,$-'8,-9$+)$:,$'7;)3+2/+$)3$4,39$'7;)3+2/+$*)3$9)53$()7;2/9$'/$<=<>?$ A26,B$C,6;)/1,/+6$*3)7$()77,3('2-$;5:-'6&,36$)/-9$D,E(-51'/0$;5:-'(-9$*5/1,1$;5:-'($:3)21(26+,36F$G$E @$(&))6,$2--$+&2+$2;;-9#$ Q12. Which of the following digital revenue streams are likely to be important or very important for your company in 2025? – choose all that apply. Base: Respondents from commercial publishers only = 299. 18 Other revenue sources mentioned by publishers include related services, such as training and marketing. Merchandise is an important supplementary revenue stream for some smaller publishers and in a number of European countries legacy commercial media rely in part on government subsidies to support local or public interest journalism. 18JOURNALISM AND TECHNOLOGY TRENDS AND PREDICTIONS 2025 Digital subscriptions are still growing but mostly at a slower rate Of those publishers that operate subscription or membership models, top-line numbers continue to rise, but privately many tell us that the rate of growth has slowed and that in many cases this is not making up for rapidly declining print revenues. Digital subscriptions are still growing for most of the publishers surveyed Changes to the number of digital subscribers in the last year Data from a survey of 326 media leaders in 51 countries for 'Journalism, media and technology trends and predictions 2025' Up a lot 28% Up a bit Stable 19% 45% Down a bit 6% 3% Down a lot 0% 25% Q13. If your company uses a subscription or membership model, how has the number of pay ing customers changed in the past year, if at all? Base = 297. Source: 'Journalism, media and technology trends and predictions 2025'. 73% 50% Q13. If your company uses a subscription or membership model, how has the number of paying customers changed in the past year, if at all? Base = 235. New product development takes centre stage In this environment, many publishers worry that current strategies of focusing on improving core products will not be enough. This is why nearly half of publisher respondents (44%) in our survey said they considered it more of a priority to develop new products and services as a way of driving growth. Priority focus for future growth by news organisations in 2025 Priority focus for future growth by news organisations Data from a survey of 326 media leaders in 51 countries for 'Journalism, media and technology trends and predictions 2025'. Strengthen the existing product 55% Develop new products and services 44% Don't know 1% Q14. When thinking about driving business growth and reaching new audiences in the future, which of the following will be most important? Choose one. Base = 300. Source: 'Journalism, media and technology trends and predictions 2025'. Q14. When thinking about driving business growth and reaching new audiences in the future, which of the following will be most important? Choose one. Base = 300. Some	of	this	year’s	initiatives	are	designed	to	target	hard-to-reach	audiences,	with	around	four in ten (42%) saying they are thinking about or planning a new product aimed at young people. Between a quarter and a third say they are actively looking at audio (26%) or video (30%) products or services this year. Others are planning to invest in adjacent areas such as games (29%), education (26%), or food (13%). Much of this is inspired by the example of the New York Times which has created a product portfolio that includes games, sport, recipes, and new product reviews, as well as audio. Much of its growth in recent years has come from these lifestyle	products	and	from	the	all-access	bundling	strategy	which	has	significantly	improved	overall retention. 19What kind of news product development are publishers prioritising in 2025? THE REUTERS INSTITUTE FOR THE STUDY OF JOURNALISM What kind of news product development are publishers prioritising this year? Data from a survey of 326 media leaders in 51 countries for 'Journalism, media and technology trends and predictions 2025'. Already have/invest further Plan to launch/thinking about No plans Don't know Core news Audio product 46% 26% Video product 36% 30% 25% 30% Youth product 31% 42% 25% 20% 23% International product 47% News adjacent Sport product 30% 14% 8% 51% Food 28% 13% 54% Education learning 27% 26% Games 25% 29% 40% 7% 39% 18% 14% 8% New product reviews 58% 10% Q15. Which of the following new products/services, if any, are you planning to invest in this year? Base=298 Source: 'Journalism, media and technology trends and predictions 2025'. Q15. Which of the following new products/services, if any, are you planning to invest in this year? Base = 298. What may happen in 2025? • More and different kinds of bundling: Many publishers are looking to replicate the New York Times model by developing new products (as per the chart above) that they can put into an all-access subscription. The Guardian launched a cooking app (Feast) and is looking to add product reviews in 2025 while The Times (of London) and the Telegraph offer	puzzle-only	subscriptions	in	the	UK.	In	Sweden,	Bonnier’s	+Allt	bundle	includes	content from more than 70 Swedish local and national titles as well as magazines, while Mediahuis and DPG are following a similar strategy in the Netherlands and Belgium. Bundles also make sense from a consumer point of view. The number of news subscription offers has exploded in recent years, with substackers and YouTubers now competing for share of wallet with traditional media – leaving overwhelmed consumers looking for more convenient and cost-effective solutions. Bonnier (Sweden) bundles local and national Politiken (Denmark) bundles  national and international 20 This year we can expect more partnerships between companies that are not part of the same publishing group. Subscribers to leading European brands such as Politiken and FAZ have been able to access the New York Times as part of their subscription for a limited duration. Expect to see these deals extended to more publications as a way to reduce churn or differentiate a more expensive product. 22JOURNALISM AND TECHNOLOGY TRENDS AND PREDICTIONS 2025 But	publishers	won’t	have	it	all	their	own	way.	Platforms	are	also	looking	to	get	in	on	the	act,	with	Apple+	finding	some	success	in	the	US,	UK,	and	Canada	in	attracting	an	increasingly extensive range of premium content. As Ben Smith points out in his Nieman Lab	prediction:	‘If	media	companies	can’t	figure	out	how	to	be	the	bundlers,	other	layers	of	the	ecosystem	–	telecoms,	devices,	social	platforms	–	will.’16 • Audio everywhere: More media companies plan to integrate audio (read articles, audio summaries, and podcasts) into their websites and apps this year. But others are looking to launch separate audio products that they hope will drive both revenue and new audiences. Last year The Economist blazed a trail by putting the majority of podcasts behind a paywall (attracting 30,000 subscribers in six months). Die Zeit has launched an audio app with a separate subscription, and the New York Times will be experimenting with an audioonly subscription through third-party platforms. Because podcasts tend to drive loyalty, many Nordic publishers are including podcasts in their allaccess subscription packages. • Print investment as part of a mixed strategy?	The	loss	of	referral	traffic	from	search	and social is forcing many publishers to look again at a channel that many have written off but still has timeless attributes. ‘People still derive intellectual and aesthetic pleasure from	print,’	says	editor-in-chief	of	The Atlantic	Jeffrey	Goldberg.	‘It	doesn’t	beep	and	f lash	and	demand	that	you	do	things.	It’s	there	to	be	read	and	enjoyed.’17 The magazine is increasing its print frequency from 10 to 12 issues a year, reverting to a monthly schedule	for	the	first	time	since	2002.	The	magazine	move	reinforces	the	importance	of investing in channels that are not so dependent on the whims and algorithms of big tech companies. In a similar vein digital-born Tortoise Media bought the Observer, the world oldest Sunday newspaper, in December 2024 with a long-term commitment to maintaining	its	future	in	print	and	promising	an	investment	of	£25m	over	five	years.	16 https://www.niemanlab.org/2024/12/back-to-the-bundle/ 17 Quote	from	an	interview	with	CNN’s	Brain	Stelter:	https://edition.cnn.com/2024/10/11/media/the-atlantic-magazine-printmonthly-subscription/index.html 23 21THE REUTERS INSTITUTE FOR THE STUDY OF JOURNALISM 5.	Personalities,	Influencers,	and	the	‘Creator-fication’		of News In	the	wake	of	the	US	election	there	has	been	much	talk	about	the	role	of	influencers	and	their impact on politics and the media. But this is not just about big names such as Joe Rogan, Logan	Paul,	and	the	Nelk	Boys.	This	trend	also	encompasses	a	long	tail	of	influencers	and	personalities who are capturing attention across a vast swathe of news-related subjects, as well as former journalists setting up on their own. A recent report from the Pew Research Center18	found	that	around	one-in-five	(21%)	Americans	–	including	a	higher	share	of	adults	under	30	(37%)	–	regularly	get	news	from	influencers	on	social	media,	with	much	of	the	content	focused	on	politics.	The	majority	of	news	influencers	(63%)	identified	by	Pew	were	men.	Over	half	of	the	top	150	political	TikTok	accounts	in	the		US were from content creators rather than journalists according to social-media research  f irm	CredoIQ.19 Our own Reuters Institute research from multiple countries documented similar trends. In Brazil prominent social media personalities present a blend of news, entertainment, and opinion via YouTube and Instagram channels. Elsewhere we also found a number of young news creators with a reputation for explaining the news or conducting original investigations. These include	Hugo	Travers	(HugoDécrypte)	who	has	become	a	‘go-to’	person	for	under-30s	in	France	for	news,	Jack	Kelly’s	TLDR,	Vitus	Spehar’s	popular	TikTok	round-up,	and	Jordan	ShanksMarkovina, an Australian YouTuber who blends humour with investigative reporting.  Salomé Saqué Interviews, weekly features Explaining the news Daily TikTok round-up Investigations, comedy Climate change, gender issues Many	of	these	influencers	are	providing	fresh	perspectives	or	takes	on	the	news,	which	often	feel more authentic than stuffy traditional news formats, even as others have been shown to peddle extreme opinions and conspiracy theories. The Pew study found that the vast majority (77%)	of	news	influencers	had	no	prior	journalistic	experience,	raising	questions	about	the	24 reliability of their content. In a separate report by UNESCO, 62% of surveyed creators said they don’t	vet	the	accuracy	of	content	before	sharing	it	with	followers.20 18 Pew	defined	news	influencers	as	individuals	who	regularly	post	about	current	events	and	civic	issues	and	have	at	least	100,000	followers on any of Facebook, Instagram, TikTok, X, or YouTube. https://www.pewresearch.org/journalism/2024/11/18/americasnews-influencers 19 https://www.wsj.com/business/media/tiktok-young-news-publishers-936aa320 20 https://edition.cnn.com/2024/11/26/media/social-media-influencers-verify-information-study/index.html 22JOURNALISM AND TECHNOLOGY TRENDS AND PREDICTIONS 2025 But this picture is further complicated by the exodus from traditional media organisations of a number of prominent journalists who are also leaning into the personality trend. In October 2024, Taylor Lorenz, a technology and internet culture reporter, left the Washington Post to set up	‘User	Mag’	Substack	and	a	podcast	called	Power	User.	Lorenz,	who	increasingly	identifies	with	the	influencer	community,	said	she	wanted	autonomy	to	write,	do,	and	say	what	she	wants	without institutional restriction. She also said she prefers a more direct and vocal relationship with	her	audience,	another	feature	of	influencer	culture	which	is	often	hard	to	achieve	within	a	traditional	media	organisation.	‘Legacy	media	sucks	…	I’m	going	to	dance	on	the	grave	of	a	lot	of	these	places’,	she	told	the	New Yorker.21 These comments illustrate the way in which many influencers	position	themselves	in	opposition	to	mainstream	journalism,	adding	further	to	the	criticism that ordinary people see. Meanwhile, Tucker Carlson, a former anchor at Fox News, has spent much of the last year building	up	his	‘alternative’	news	brand	on	various	platforms,	starting	with	an	exclusive	interview with Russian president Vladimir Putin (more than 200m plays on X alone). Other former journalists who have found a home on third-party platforms include Johnny Harris, a former video producer at Vox, who has built a successful YouTube channel around explainer content with more than 6 million subscribers. The rewards can be considerable. Matthew Yglesias, a co-founder of Vox Media who left   for Substack is likely earning over $1m a year from his paid subscribers, according to  Business Insider.22 Taylor Lorenz building her own media empire Johnny Harris: A YouTube success story The	trend	of	journalists	moving	to	platforms	aligns	with	the	so-called	‘creator-fication’	of journalism, as top talent seeks more control over their content and their audience relationships. Our digital leaders survey reveals mixed views about these trends, with 28% seeing this as positive for journalism and 27% suggesting the opposite. Is the trend towards personalities and influencers good or bad for journalism? Data from a survey of 326 media leaders in 51 countries for 'Journalism, media and technology trends and predictions 2025'. Is the trend towards personalities and influencers good or bad for journalism? Good 28% Neither good nor bad Bad 42% 27% Don't know 3% Q21. News brands are increasingly being challenged by personalities/individuals setting up on their own as substackers, podcasters , or YouTubers. On balance, do you think this trend is good or bad for journalism? N=295 Source: 'Journalism, media and technology trends and predictions 2025'. 25 Q21. News brands are increasingly being challenged by personalities/individuals setting up on their own as substackers, podcasters, or YouTubers. On balance, do you think this trend is good or bad for journalism? Base = 295. 21 https://www.newyorker.com/culture/infinite-scroll/taylor-lorenzs-plan-to-dance-on-legacy-medias-grave 22 https://www.businessinsider.com/matt-yglesias-substack-million-dollars-interview-2024-10 23THE REUTERS INSTITUTE FOR THE STUDY OF JOURNALISM One senior editor cautions that the focus on personalities could ‘usurp the principles of independent	fact-based	journalism’,	opening	the	door	to	‘yet	more	opinion,	where	it	is	he	or	she	who	shouts	loudest	wins	the	day’.	Others	worry	about	a	lack	of	rigour	in	checking	sources	or	scrutinising interviewees, creating an even greater problem around mis- and disinformation. ‘I 26 Reuters Institute Trends and Pedictions charts and images 2  27.pdf   1   30/12/2024   12:45 PM 26 Reuters Institute Trends and Pedictions charts and images 2  27.pdf   1   30/12/2024   12:45 PM am	genuinely	concerned	about	the	rise	of	influencers	and	other	private	individuals	as	more	and	more	citizens	turn	to	them	for	news	and	consider	them	valid	agents	of	information,’	says	Daniel	Bramon	Batlle,	from	3Cat	in	Spain.	A	recent	BBC	investigation	into	Stephen	Bartlett’s	popular	global podcast, Diary of a CEO, found that episodes were increasingly focused on health-related !"#$%#&'()*"+#"",-'$./0)-"'%)-'1##&')002-#/'.3'-$*#)/4&5'%#)+"%' 64-4&3.*6)"4.&' !"#$%#&'()*"+#"",-'$./0)-"'%)-'1##&')002-#/'.3'-$*#)/4&5'%#)+"%' 64-4&3.*6)"4.&' subjects,	with	over	a	dozen	carrying	multiple	‘harmful	claims’	that	went	against	extensive	scientific	evidence.23 Stephen Bartlett’s podcast has been accused of spreading health misinformation  But many other respondents to our survey emphasised the positive side in terms of new perspectives, creative storytelling, and a commitment to interact with audiences. ‘We believe that	this	is	a	natural	evolution	in	the	way	audiences	consume,’	says	Jhulissa	Michelle	Nogales	Cardozo, CEO and founder of the feminist outlet Muy Waso in Bolivia. ‘I believe that many of these content creators have found a new way to relate to communities and have managed to generate	something	that	many	media	have	lost:	people’s	trust.’ What may happen in 2025? 27 27 • Influencer impresarios and umbrella brands: While some creators are happy to work on their own, others are increasingly looking to extend their brand and their business. Johnny Harris works with other creators who share his vision for ‘relatable quality journalism	with	context	and	history’	under	his	New	Press	publishing	company.	The	latest	sign up is Christophe Haubursin, whose Tunnel Vision show investigates topics such as Bitcoin, WhatsApp groups, and the future of fast fashion. Search Party creator Sam Ellis is also part of the network, which creates critical mass in terms of revenue and grows audiences for all the channels. In a different domain Goalhanger is building a network of podcast/vodcast verticals in the UK and US based around well-known personalities who are on a lucrative revenue share for their shows. Much of this talent has been drawn from traditional media companies. 23 https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/c4gpz163vg2o 24JOURNALISM AND TECHNOLOGY TRENDS AND PREDICTIONS 2025 • Media learn to work with influencers: We can also expect to see more tie-ups between traditional media and creators, with both looking to enhance their credibility and reach.	Romanian	news	website	PressOne	started	collaborating	with	influencers	in	2022	to promote news consumption amongst young audiences, followed the next year by a project on drug policy. ‘These collaborations really helped us, at the beginning, to reach the	audience	that	we	wanted	to	reach	on	Instagram’,	says	Mălina	Gîndu,	Social	Media	Manager	at	PressOne.	In	exchange,	she	says,	the	influencers	benefited	from	the	credibility	of being associated with the PressOne brand. As young creators, ‘They were looking to legitimise	themselves’,	she	added.	In	other	cases,	media	brands	have	gone	a	step	further	hiring creators directly to run social channels on networks like TikTok and Snapchat. This strategy has proved effective for Le Monde in attracting younger audiences, as well as educating them on news literacy in a language and tone they are familiar with. Romanian website working with Romanian website working with  influencers to promote news literacy Romanian website working with  influencers to promote news literacy influencers to promote news literacy Le Monde using creator techniques to get across messages about the  Le Monde using creator techniques to get across messages about the dangers of misinformation Le Monde using creator techniques to get across messages about the dangers of misinformation dangers of misinformation 28 28 25THE REUTERS INSTITUTE FOR THE STUDY OF JOURNALISM 6. Managing and Retaining Talent in the Newsroom In an era when audiences, especially younger audiences, tend to pay more attention to individuals than traditional news brands, should newsrooms encourage their journalists to cultivate their own brand personality? Opinions vary. Some, like the head of digital at a European	legacy	publication,	think	that	‘if	we	want	to	compete	…	we	need	to	find	and	create	our	own	influencers’.	Mpho	Raborife,	Managing	Editor	at	News24	in	South	Africa,	believes	that	‘there’s	still	a	value	in	being	associated	with	the	brand’	and,	while	there	could	be	the	risk	of	talent outgrowing the organisation and leaving, this is not yet happening at scale. Elsewhere,	however,	the	talent	exodus	has	been	significant.	The	BBC	has	recently	lost	some	of its biggest stars to become podcasters or to go to commercial rivals, most recently one of the	Corporation’s	highest-profile	news	journalists	Mishal	Husain,	who	has	left	the	flagship	Today radio show for Bloomberg.24 Despite this, our survey shows that the vast majority of our respondents	(81%)	are	confident	of	keeping	this	top	talent,	even	if	they	recognise	the	risks	are	greater than for other editorial staff. Digital analytics have made the value of an individual journalist more apparent, showing that editorial stars can often deliver a disproportionate amount of engagement – as well as new subscribers. But managing talent is not without its challenges. ‘I think one of the risks is that, in	the	end,	a	few	people,	especially	men,	dominate,	the	image	of	ElDiario,’	says	María	Ramírez,	Deputy Managing Editor at ElDiario, in Spain. The voices of journalists who might be less inclined to show their own face, she says, are in danger of being left behind, potentially leading to unintended gender imbalances. How confident media leaders are in attracting and retaining talent in different areas Confidence in attracting and retaining talent in the following areas Data from a survey of 326 media leaders in 51 countries for 'Journalism, media and technology trends and predictions 2025'. Confident Notconfident Editorial (general) 85% Don't know Editorial (stars) 13% 81% 18% Commercial 59% 13% Product & design 59% 28% 38% Data science/AI 7% 41% 52% Software engineers 7% 38% 55% Q22. How confident are you that your organisation can attract and retain the talent you need in the following areas? Base = 297. 18% not confident of keeping top editorial stars More unconfident than confident in keeping this critical talent in era where AI skills are more needed than ever Q22. How confident are you that your organisation can attract and retain the talent you need in the following areas? Base = 297. Source: 'Journalism, media and technology trends and predictions 2025'. But the challenges around editorial talent are nothing compared with other parts of the business, as previous Changing Newsrooms reports have shown.25 Over half of respondents say they	are	not	confident	about	attracting	or	keeping	data	scientists	(52%)	or	software	engineers	(55%). There are also concerns around product and design talent as well as commercialiroles. 24 https://www.theguardian.com/media/2024/nov/27/today-presenter-mishal-husain-to-leave-bbc-in-new-year 25 See our Changing Newsrooms 2021 report https://reutersinstitute.politics.ox.ac.uk/changing-newsrooms-2021-hybrid-workingand-improving-diversity-remain-twin-challenges-publishers#header--2 26JOURNALISM AND TECHNOLOGY TRENDS AND PREDICTIONS 2025 This	suggests	a	significant	imbalance,	given	the	need	to	innovate	around	new	product	developments	and	artificial	intelligence.	‘It’s	more	difficult	maybe,	to	find	people	[in	areas	where]	there	is	more	competition,	because	some	of	these	profiles	obviously	could	work	for	any	company	that’s	not	necessarily	a	newsroom	…	and	usually	other	industries	pay	more’,	says	María Ramírez. ‘But at the same time, if you manage to hire talent in those areas who have an interest	and	an	inclination	for	news,	it’s	easier	to	retain	them,’	she	added. What may happen in 2025? • More complex negotiations with talent as star power grows. At the end of the day, this is not a new problem. ‘Public radio has always had stars. We have historic examples of people in journalism developing their own brands that become bigger than the brands	of	the	company	they	represent,’	says	Ariel	Zirulnick,	former	Director	of	News	Experimentation at Californian outlet LAist. ‘Network anchors that became the voices of the	country	in	key	moments	in	history.	Like	Ira	Glass,	for	example.’	But	what	was	different	in the past, Zirulnick noted, is that once these stars decided to move on, the transition was managed more gracefully than what seems to be happening now. She added: ‘Yes, these	stars’	brands	can	become	bigger	than	those	of	their	organisations	and	that	makes	things more complex for the organisation. You get into questions about retention and special compensation structure and we need to learn how to handle this complexity and how	to	make	it	worthwhile	for	stars	to	stay.	You	can’t	hold	on	to	those	people	forever	but	there	are	ways	to	cultivate	the	next	person	into	a	rising	star	as	well.’	• Editorial-tech hybrid newsroom roles become more important: Newsrooms may struggle	to	hire	and	retain	talent	in	areas	like	tech	and	AI,	but	it’s	an	exciting	time	for	editors with an interest in technology. Senior editors such as Jane Barrett at Reuters and Sannuta Raghu at Scroll in India are becoming well-known voices in the AI space using editorial creativity and cultural editorial capital to understand how best to leverage AI for journalistic purposes. 27THE REUTERS INSTITUTE FOR THE STUDY OF JOURNALISM 7. Combating News Fatigue amongst Journalists    and Audiences Our research has extensively documented the challenges of combating news fatigue amongst audiences	who	decide,	at	times,	to	disengage	and	even	opt	out	entirely	from	a	difficult	news	agenda. Across countries in our most recent Digital News Report, almost four in ten (39%) said they sometimes or often avoid the news.26 The ongoing wars in Gaza and Ukraine, combined with the growing impact of climate change have added to the challenges facing news organisations this year. The barrage of bad news (Ukraine, Middle-East, Climate Catastrophe, Trump) cannot be avoided anymore. A world in turmoil, too much to block out. Senior leader at a German broadcaster How	to	engage	audiences	with	difficult	but	important	stories,	without	pushing	people	away	entirely?	How	to	give	a	sense	of	hope	around	conflicts	that	seem	entirely	devoid	of	it?	There	are no easy answers to these questions, but here are some newsroom strategies. • The Guardian runs a daily explainer, with key bullet points about the RussiaUkraine	war	(see	illustration	on	p.	29).	‘It’s	consistently	popular	and	with	high	reading	times	–	and	absolutely	seems	to	serve	those	with	a	strong	interest	but	who	don’t	want	to	follow	the	exhausting	pace	of	the	live	blogs	and	developments’,	said	Chris	Moran,	Head of Editorial Innovation. • Dagens Nyheter in Sweden uses a variety of formats including live blogs, podcasts, and social video. Human stories are a powerful way to show the impact on ordinary lives. One story on TikTok on what happened to a group of friends who were celebrating a bachelor party before the war in Gaza was particularly successful in engaging younger audiences (see illustration on p. 29). • Helsingin Sanomat showed photographs of the devastation in Gaza to members of the Finnish parliament and wrote a story capturing their feelings and reactions: ‘A	change	of	method	can	bring	the	conflict	closer	and	engage	a	new	audience’,	says	Managing Editor, Product Jussi Pullinen. 26 https://reutersinstitute.politics.ox.ac.uk/digital-news-report/2024/dnr-executive-summary 28JOURNALISM AND TECHNOLOGY TRENDS AND PREDICTIONS 2025 Different approaches to keeping wars in the public eye from the Guardian, Dagens Nyheter, and Helsingin Sanomat It’s	not	just	audiences	who	are	affected	by	the	intensity	of	covering	these	conflicts	and	the	criticism that often comes with this. According to recent surveys over half of media workers in countries as diverse as Canada, Spain, and Ecuador reported high levels of anxiety, with one  in	five	reporting	depression.27 This amounts to a prolonged mental health crisis that cuts  across generations. 29 What may happen in 2025? • Pressures move to older generations: Mpho Raborife, Managing Editor at News24 in South Africa, was a Reuters Institute Fellow in 2023: ‘When I was doing my paper with the Institute last year28 I was highlighting the fact that, because of how they experience life on	the	planet	and	some	of	the	economic	and	social	stresses,	they’re	a	little	bit	more	prone	to anxiety and depression, isolation and even mental health illnesses, but a year later, I can	tell	you	now	that	this	feeling	is	wider	than	a	younger	journalist	effect.’	She	continued:	‘The older generations have found ways to cope with it or have maybe unhealthy ways of blocking things out and not necessarily addressing them, as opposed to the younger journalists	who	will	ask	to	tap	out	earlier	than	the	elder	generations	do.’	Expect	to	see	high-profile	correspondents	and	war	reporters	talking	more	about	these	issues	in	2025. • Positive news products as part of the mix: Around a third of those that stop their ElDiario	subscriptions	say	they	are	fatigued	by	the	news	or	don’t	have	enough	time.29 In response the publication is looking to introduce a new product offering, maybe a newsletter, that selects just the best or the more interesting news of the month, or, alternatively, news with a constructive or positive angle. • More signal, less noise: Slow journalism will be back on the agenda this year. Finnish start-up Uusi Juttu (New Thing) is looking to shake up the traditional media when it launches at the start of 2025, with insights and support from the team behind Zetland in Denmark. The team plans to publish just a couple of in-depth features a day with 27 https://www.niemanlab.org/2022/12/the-inevitable-mental-health-revolution/ 28 https://reutersinstitute.politics.ox.ac.uk/seven-ways-create-newsroom-gen-zs-will-stay 29 Interview with María Ramírez. 29THE REUTERS INSTITUTE FOR THE STUDY OF JOURNALISM daily	audio	and	newsletter	briefings	on	top.	In	a	similar	vein,	the	Swedish	newspaper	SvD	is	finding	success	with	Kompakt	(tag	line	‘Read	less,	know	more’)	which	is	aimed	at	moderate news readers who want to spend less time on their screens (see case   study below). New approaches to combating news fatigue Launches January More than 10,000 members so far Looking to challenge existing ‘broken’ media Two in-depth stories a day Strong focus on audio including daily podcast C M Y CM MY CY CMY K 30a Reuters Institute Trends and Pedictions charts and images 2  30.pdf   1   30/12/2024   1:43 PM New formats and accessible and conversational styles Less text, more visual and socially native storytelling Designed to serve younger and hard to reach audiences Delivered 50,000 sign ups in the last year 60% of users are totally new for SvD  30JOURNALISM AND TECHNOLOGY TRENDS AND PREDICTIONS 2025 8. Generative AI and Newsroom Transformation Over the last year, news organisations have been getting their heads around the full implications of Generative AI for journalism and for their businesses. At least in some larger newsrooms, principles and guidelines are largely in place and specialist AI roles have been created,	as	predicted	in	last	year’s	report. This	activity	is	not	confined	to	the	newsroom,	with	commercial,	operational,	and	product	teams	also looking to get on board. In our survey, it is clear that the focus still remains on back-end efficiencies,	with	96%	of	publisher	respondents	saying	this	will	be	very	important	or	somewhat	important in the year ahead. Using AI to improve personalisation and recommendation comes next (80%), followed by content creation (77%) and newsgathering functions (73%) such as verification,	data	journalism,	and	investigations.	Coding	(67%)	and	commercial	uses	(63%)	are	also considered valuable to publishers. Different uses of AI that media leaders think will be important in 2025 Different uses of AI that will be important in 2025 … All uses have increased since last year, especially back-end, news-gathering, and commercial uses. All uses have increased since last year especially back-end, newsgathering, and commercial. from a survey of 326 media leaders in 51 countries for 'Journalism, media and technology trends and predictions 2025'. Very important Somewhatimportant Not/notvery important Don't know Back-end automation(e.g. tagging/transcription/copyediting etc) 60% 41% 30% 29% 28% 24% 36% 39% 47% 34% Distribution and recommendations (e.g. personalised home pages, alerts etc) Content creation albeit with human oversight (e.g. summaries, headlines, graphics, video) Commercial uses (e.g. better propensity to pay models etc) Coding and product development Newsgathering (e.g. help identifying stories/interrogate data) 40% 49% 15% 13% 17% 21% 22% 19% 24% Q17. To what extent will the following uses of Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Generative AI be important to your company in 2025? Base = 297. Source: 'Journalism, media and technology trends and predictions 2025'. Q17. To what extent will the following uses of Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Generative AI be important to your company in 2025? Base = 297. AI toolkits everywhere Many large publishers such as the New York Times and Financial Times have invested in crossfunctional teams to experiment with the technology and support the newsroom with  cultural change. Early outputs have been promising. AI toolkits pull together a set of useful tasks such as headline suggestions and different kinds of summaries. At JP/Politikens Media Group, a central team has created MAGNA, a tool which can assist with a range of editing tasks (see left illustration on p. 32) from correcting spelling errors to generating drafts from just a few basic facts. The tool is used by three different publications in the group and can adapt the content to the different style guides of each. At Helsingin Sanomat, the AI toolkit is focused more on Data 31THE REUTERS INSTITUTE FOR THE STUDY OF JOURNALISM newsgathering and research. This includes translation, support for data investigations, and creating an automated timeline on any story, trained on trusted content, such as Helsingin Sanomat articles (see below right). AI Article tool from JP/Politikens Hus AI Article tool from JP/Politikens Hus AI Assistant from Helsingin Sanomat AI Assistant from Helsingin Sanomat Note: Output in these images have been translated into English. 35 AI is also helping to transform investigative and data journalism: ‘AI models are enabling us to work with dispersed sources, creating stories that previously required weeks or even months of effort,’	says	Antonio	Delgado,	co-founder	of	Datadista	in	Spain.	Similar	advances	are	helping	to	speed up previously laborious processes around verifying misinformation and disinformation in external platforms: ‘Use of AI tools for fact-checking – especially audio and video – has been very	effective	for	us’,	says	Ritu	Kapur,	co-founder	and	CEO	of	the	Quint	in	India.	Der	Spiegel	is one of many publishers experimenting with using AI to help fact-check copy – functionality that could eventually be built into the Content Management System (CMS). Der Spiegel: experimental factchecking tool with side by side functionality  Der Spiegel: experimental factchecking tool with side by side functionality 36 32JOURNALISM AND TECHNOLOGY TRENDS AND PREDICTIONS 2025 These initiatives are building powerful learnings about how to get the best out the technology, but it may take time for these investments to pay off. Hiring specialist AI teams to build and maintain in-house applications can be costly and while journalism can be improved	and	outputs	can	be	enhanced,	it	is	not	clear	that	significant	savings	will	follow.	‘We	are still in an experimentation phase but looking for real-world applications that move the needle’,	says	Simon	Regan-Edwards,	Product	Director	at	the	Daily Mail. The majority of respondents to our survey feel that newsrooms are being transformed somewhat	(63%)	or	fully	(24%)	due	to	Generative	AI,	though	this	may	be	a	reflection	of	what	To what extent media leaders think newsrooms are being transformed by generative AI people see in other newsrooms rather than their own. Just 12% say that there is not so much change – or none at all (1%) Up to 87%of our respondents think generative AI is already transforming newsrooms. How far newsrooms are being transformed by Generative AI technologies Data from a survey of 326 media leaders in 51 countries for 'Journalism, media and technology trends and predictions 2025'. Fully 24% Somewhat 63% Not so much 12% Not at all 1% 1% Don't know 0% 25% 50% 75% Q16. To what extent, if at all, do you think that Gen AI is transforming newsrooms? Base = 299. Q16. To what extent, if at all, do you think that Gen AI is transforming newsrooms? Base = 299. Source: 'Journalism, media and technology trends and predictions 2025'. Content transformation the next big thing 87% fully or somewhat As	publishers	gain	more	confidence	with	the	technology,	expect	more	focus	on	audiencefacing format transformations this year. Advances in voice technologies have made it possible to transform text articles into audio (in multiple languages or tones) and most publishers (75%) are planning to do more with this functionality this year. Beyond that, AI summaries at the top of articles (70%) are likely to become more widespread, over half (56%) are planning chatbot/AI search functionality for audiences to interact with, with around a third (36%) looking	to	experiment	with	turning	text	stories	into	video	(36%).	Again,	publishers	won’t	have it all their own way, with AI-driven browsers such as Dia30 also allowing consumers to summarise, rewrite, and reformat articles to suit their own preferences set to launch this year. 30 AI-centric web browser being developed by The Browser Company, the creators of the Arc browser. Set to launch in early 2025. 33Top audience-facing AI initiatives planned by publishers in 2025 THE REUTERS INSTITUTE FOR THE STUDY OF JOURNALISM Top audience-facing AI initiatives planned by publishers in 2025 Data from a survey of 326 media leaders in 51 countries for 'Journalism, media and technology trends and predictions 2025'. Text into audio (or audio to text) 75% AI-driven summarisation (e.g. bullet points) 70% AI translation into different languages 65% Chatbots/new search interfaces 56% Text articles into video (or video to text) 36% Adapting language/tone for different audiences 21% Other 11% None/Don't know 6% 0% 25% 50% 75% 100% Q18. Which of the following audience focused AI initiatives, if any, will you be actively exploring in 2025? Please select all that apply. Base = 297. Q18. Which of the following audience focused AI initiatives, if any, will you be actively exploring in 2025? Please select all that apply. Base= 297. Source: 'Journalism, media and technology trends and predictions 2025'. A number of publishers have been experimenting this year with their own chatbots that are trained on their own articles and other trusted sources. Aftonbladet was early out of the gate with	an	‘election	buddy’	that	answered	questions	about	the	Swedish	elections	in	June	2024.	A	lot	of	manual	work	was	required	to	check	the	bots’	answers,	but	overall	180,000	queries	were	processed	with	no	known	‘hallucinations’.31 In November, the Washington Post launched an	experimental	Generative	AI	tool	called	‘Ask	the	Post	AI’,	which	brings	back	answers	on	any topic referenced in news articles published by the paper since 2016. The Financial Times is	trialling	a	similar	feature,	‘Ask	FT’,	for	its	professional	users.	These	services	carry	some	risk but expect some big publishers to integrate these into site search functions this year to significantly	improve	access	to	their	archive. Audience-facing chatbots and search interfaces on the way Chatbots Aftonbladet Aftonbladet Financial Times Financial Times Washington Post Washington Post 40 31 https://www.inma.org/blogs/Generative-AI-Initiative/post.cfm/aftonbladet-sparks-interest-in-elections-using-its-new-chatbot 34JOURNALISM AND TECHNOLOGY TRENDS AND PREDICTIONS 2025 What may happen in 2025? Third-party tools get smarter: As fast as the media develop their own tools, the big tech companies	are	adding	compelling	new	features	of	their	own.	Third-party	tools	like	Google’s	Notebook LM have surprised many with their accuracy and ease of use for a range of journalist tasks such as summarising transcripts, documents, and data for an investigation. Transcription and translation functionalities are being integrated into a range of free tools and their enterprise versions (Google, Microsoft, Zoom, Dropbox), which has opened up AI technology to smaller publishers at relatively low cost. Third-party chatbots are also now performing well in  answering news-related queries on subjects like elections, according to a recent Reuters   Institute factsheet,32 raising questions about how much effort publishers should put into  their own solutions. Specialist workflow tools for the news industry: Existing tools such as Chartbeat are getting a makeover, having already integrated AI-driven headline suggestions. Others are looking to use AI to improve moderation of website comments or make	workflows	more	efficient.	OpusClip	AI	(right)	turns long video interviews or footage into viral shorts that can be shared on TikTok, YouTube Shorts, and Reels. It picks out the most likely clips, automatically turns the aspect ratio from horizontal to	vertical,	adds	captions	and	platform	specific	effects. Given the fragmentation of platforms, these multi-channel repurposing tools will become more important for publishers this year. AI-driven content explosion:	The	release	of	OpenAI’s	Sora	‘text	to	video’	generator	in	December 2024 is set to put new capabilities in the hands of millions of ordinary people. This will lead to a surge of hyper-realistic content that may be hard to distinguish from the real thing. OpenAI’s Sora: Extend, remix, blend, or generate entirely new content from text 42 32 https://reutersinstitute.politics.ox.ac.uk/how-generative-ai-chatbots-responded-questions-and-fact-checks-about-2024-ukgeneral-election 35THE REUTERS INSTITUTE FOR THE STUDY OF JOURNALISM OpenAI	also	says	it’s	put	in	place	safeguards	to	stop	the	tool	being	used	for	damaging	deep	fakes	such	as	child	sexual	abuse.	Meanwhile	our	social	feeds	are	already	filling	up	with	synthetic content this year. According to one recent study, over half of longer LinkedIn posts are already AI-generated, though it is often hard to tell the difference between this and genuine corporate	speak.	Some	worry	that	if	‘AI	slop’	(low-quality	generated	content)	spreads	too	fast,	it will start to seep into the training data of foundational LLMs, leading to what is known as model collapse.33 The adoption of metadata standards such as C2PA, that provides transparency about the origin of a piece of content, is likely to be crucial in lowering that risk and allowing algorithms to make better decisions about which content to prioritise. 33 https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-024-07566-y 36JOURNALISM AND TECHNOLOGY TRENDS AND PREDICTIONS 2025 9. Intelligent Agents and Conversational Interfaces:    The Next Big Thing? One of the most intriguing developments of 2025 is likely to be advances in intelligent agents that can work on your behalf, researching assignments, booking appointments, invoicing Listen to this Trends and Predictions report as an AI Podcast clients,	and	purchasing	presents	for	difficult	relatives.	At	least,	that	is	the	vision	behind	services	(made with Google’s Notebook LM) like Apple Intelligence that also promise to protect your data and privacy in the process. Gartner predicts that by 2028 15% or more of day-to-day work decisions will be taken by autonomous agents.34 At a party, Bella forgets the name of a work contact she met recently, but Siri is on hand to spare her embarrassment At a party, Bella forgets the name of a work contact she met recently, but Siri is on hand to spare her embarrassment Apple intelligence promotional video  But	as	in	the	example	above,	we	won’t	just	be	typing	instructions	to	our	agents	we’ll	increasingly	be	talking	to	them.	Both	inputs	and	outputs	of	the	latest	versions	of	Google’s	Gemini,	OpenAI’s	ChatGPT,	and	Apple’s	upgraded	Siri	are	multi-modal,	supporting	text,	video,	audio	(and	computer	code).	Amazon’s	Alexa	will	also	get	an	AI	makeover	this	year. 44 Voice interactions with a variety of devices (phones, headphones, smart speakers, and eyewear) have been growing but until now both latency and the quality of responses have been a barrier to	adoption.	These	problems	are	being	gradually	overcome.	ChatGPT’s	new	advanced	voice	mode, for example, offers more natural conversations that pick up non-verbal cues such as the speed at which you talk and responds with more emotion, something that has been missing so far from synthetic voices. It can also reply in different languages and it will also be possible to get updates on breaking news. All this could increase the pain for publishers with little opportunity to credit content creators or provide click-throughs to websites or apps. On the other hand, conversational interfaces could offer new ways of making long texts more accessible.	The	release	of	Notebook	LM’s	audio	overviews	released	in	September	2024	‘wowed’	the internet by turning dense articles and documents into podcasts. 34 https://www.gartner.com/en/articles/intelligent-agent-in-ai 37THE REUTERS INSTITUTE FOR THE STUDY OF JOURNALISM TikTok reactions to the release of NotebookLM The impact media leaders expect conversational interfaces will have over time RISJ Digital News Report 2018 From our survey publishers recognise the power of conversational interfaces but the majority (51%) feel that consumer adoption will be a slow burn rather than the next big thing (20%). Expected impact of conversational interfaces over time Data from a survey of 326 media leaders in 51 countries for 'Journalism, media and technology trends and predictions 2025'. The next big thing 20% A slow burn 51% Flash in the pan 9% None of the above 1% Don't know 19% 0% 20% 40% 39 60% Q19. How important do you think conversational interfaces will become for news over the next few years? Base = 296. Q19. How important do you think conversational interfaces will become for news over the next few years? Base = 296. Source: 'Journalism, media and technology trends and predictions 2025'. What may happen in 2025? • Chat to an article? Expect more websites to allow you not just to listen to an article but to interrogate it through voice chat (or text). Time magazine showcased this feature on their recent Person of the Year, featuring Donald Trump. Using voice cloning technologies these chats could increasingly be held with a digital version of the real author of the article. Platforms and browsers will also be adding these features as standard. 38JOURNALISM AND TECHNOLOGY TRENDS AND PREDICTIONS 2025 • People get over-attached to their AI agents: As agents get more life-like, there are concerns that they may become emotionally attached to an unhealthy degree. Some young	users	of	Character	AI	report	becoming	so	addicted	that	they	can’t	do	their	schoolwork.35 OpenAI suggests that more naturalistic interactions in the latest models could heighten the risk of anthropomorphisation (attributing human like traits to a non-human),	potentially	‘reducing	their	need	for	human	interaction’.	Some	users	have	even developed romantic feelings towards their AI companions, leading in one case to a	virtual	‘marriage’.36 Meanwhile AI chatbots are being touted by some as an answer to poor mental health and loneliness, with new apps offering synthetic therapists   and counsellors. 35 https://www.news.com.au/technology/online/internet/i-need-to-go-outside-young-people-extremely-addicted-as-characteraiexplodes/news-story/5780991c61455c680f34b25d5847a341 36 https://www.vox.com/future-perfect/367188/love-addicted-ai-voice-human-gpt4-emotion 39THE REUTERS INSTITUTE FOR THE STUDY OF JOURNALISM Conclusion Institutional journalism faces enormous pressures in the year ahead as technology reshapes the	way	audiences	find	and	consume	information	–	as	well	as	from	populist	politicians	and	others looking to undermine its role in fostering informed democratic debate. ‘You	are	the	media	now’,	the	phrase	coined	by	Elon	Musk	after	the	US	election,	and	repeated	by	many	others	since	–	aims	to	push	the	narrative	that	the	so-called	‘mainstream	media’	are	becoming increasingly out-of-touch and irrelevant. The vision behind his Grok.ai is that a combination of ordinary people and advanced technologies can replace many of the functions of journalists in a more immediate and less biased way. At the same time, politicians will increasingly look to bypass media scrutiny, talking directly to supporters or by linking up with ‘trusted’	influencers	who	are	sympathetic	to	their	views	(or	being	paid	for	their	efforts).	Meanwhile Reuters Institute research shows that audiences, especially younger ones, are increasingly drawn to the convenience – and entertainment value – of platforms like YouTube and	TikTok	and	in	that	context	are	less	likely	to	have	a	strong	direct	connection	with	specific	news brands. As the shift to audio and video consumption accelerates, this is likely to further encourage	the	rise	of	‘personalities’	–	increasing	the	competition	for	both	eyeballs	and	talent. In this new environment, publishers worry that their carefully crafted, evidence-based news articles will be harder to access in 2025 as social referrals dry up and traditional search links are at least partly replaced by AI aggregations, often drawn from their own work. Arguments over copyright and fair compensation will rage on throughout the year, with the outcomes having	a	significant	bearing	on	the	shape	and	size	of	the	news	industry	that	eventually	emerges. Despite these challenges, this report shows that news leaders will be looking to do all they can to turn the tide. Publishers recognise they need to rapidly improve their owned and operated platforms and make their digital products more engaging and relevant for audiences. Embracing AI to personalise content and formats will be a part of that but publishers will also want to emphasise the distinctive (and trusted) nature of their journalism and the original ‘human’	reporting	that	AI	will	never	be	able	to	replicate.	At	the	same	time,	they	will	also	be looking to shore up the business side by cutting costs, diversifying revenue streams, and attempting to rebundle news with lifestyle content to increase habit and loyalty. Not all media companies will be able to adapt fast enough and that will be increasingly evident, but times of change also throw up new opportunities. A big part of the task for news leaders	in	the	year	ahead	will	be	to	redefine	the	role	and	value	of	journalistic	institutions	in	an	age of polarisation, misinformation, and super-abundant content in a way that resonates with both staff and audiences.  40JOURNALISM AND TECHNOLOGY TRENDS AND PREDICTIONS 2025 Survey Methodology 326 people completed a closed survey between 20 November and 20 December 2024. Participants, drawn from 51 countries and territories, were invited because they held senior positions (editorial, commercial, or product) in traditional or digital-born publishing companies and	were	responsible	for	aspects	of	digital	or	wider	media	strategy.	The	results	reflect	this	strategic sample of select industry leaders. Typical job titles included Editor-in-Chief/Executive Editor, CEO, Managing Director, Head of Digital, Director of Product, and Head of Innovation. Just over half of participants were from organisations with a print background (54%), a quarter	(25%)	came	from	commercial	or	public	service	broadcasters,	with	around	a	fifth	(18%)	C M Y CM MY CY CMY K 43 Reuters Institute Trends and Pdictions charts and images 2+  45.pdf   1   29/12/2024   7:41 PM from digital-born brands. A further 6% came from B2B companies or news agencies. These proportions are similar to previous surveys. 326 participants, 51 countries and territories Survey respondents came from 51 countries Survey Country Mix (%)      Survey Country Mix (%) UK Germany Spain France United States Netherlands Italy Austria Sweden Norway Denmark Switzerland Belgium Brazil India Ireland Australia South Africa 12% 5% 5% 4% 4% 3% 3% 3% 3% 3% 3% 3% 2% 2% 2% 2% 19% 34 other countries and territories made up 16% of the total 1% 0%     Survey Job Titles (No.) Survey Job Titles (No.) Editor-in-Chief/Executive Editor CEO/MD/Publisher Deputy or other Senior Editor Digital Director/Chief Digital Officer Managing Editor CTO/ Director of Product/Product leader Head of [Editorial] Innovation Strategy/Advisors Other Head Audience Engagement Director/Chairman/Founder Head of AI/ Innnovation Head of Marketing/Business… Head of Multimedia/Visuals/Audio 46 27 21 19 17 15 13 12 10 9 65 63 5% 10% 15% 20% Base = 326 Digital Leaders surveyed, 51 countries, 20 November – 20 December 2024 Base = 326. Digital Leaders surveyed 20 November–20 December 2024. 4 5 The 51 countries and territories represented in the survey included Australia, New Zealand, Taiwan, Hong Kong, Singapore, the Philippines, Thailand, Vietnam, Japan, Nigeria, South Africa, Paraguay, Honduras, Uruguay Mexico, Brazil, Colombia, and Israel, but the majority came from the UK, US, or European countries such Germany, Spain, France, Austria, Finland, Norway, Denmark, and the Netherlands as well as Poland, Hungary, and Slovakia, amongst others. Participants	filled	out	an	online	survey	with	specific	questions	around	strategic	and	digital	intent in 2025. Over 90% answered most questions, although response rates to questions vary. The majority contributed comments and ideas in open questions and some of these are quoted with permission in this document. The authors are grateful for additional input from a number of publishers, academics, and industry experts when preparing this report via background conversions, interviews and emails. These included Rasmus Kleis Nielsen, University of Copenhagen, David Caswell, AI expert at 41THE REUTERS INSTITUTE FOR THE STUDY OF JOURNALISM Structured	Stories,	María	Ramírez,	Deputy	Managing	Editor	at	ElDiario,	Mălina	Gîndu,	Social	Media Manager at PressOne, Mpho Raborife, Managing Editor at News24, Chris Moran, Head of Editorial Innovation at the Guardian, Ariel Zirulnick, former Director of News Experimentation at LAist, Troels Jørgensen, Digital Director at Politiken, Matilda Hanson, Deputy Managing Editor at Dagens Nyheter, Esa Mäkinen, Executive Editor at Helsingin Sanomat, Jussi Pullinen, Managing Editor, Product at Helsingin Sanomat, Damian Radcliffe, University of Oregon, and David Tvrdon, writer and digital strategist, Slovakia. 42