---
title: "Why a weight-loss drug could become a geopolitical bargaining chip"
source: "https://www.ft.com/content/27611730-af18-4540-92de-acef2b3209d9?accessToken=zwAAAZW3xSOakc8nYRcwrxhFQNOS3qzvKzIJ2Q.MEUCIQC2UY_DB4Fn4bPsbLcBo_9M5oYnzJr_SeYNQCoKB2HT0gIgaLduBKLTfy_M58jHBt8kO6AXTuDzPl4n_b87LALHpPw&segmentId=e95a9ae7-622c-6235-5f87-51e412b47e97&shareType=enterprise&shareId=bbb31849-0a58-4404-9e87-b259552813b4"
author:
published: 2025-03-21
created: 2025-04-07
description: "Ozempic might feature in US negotiations with Denmark over Greenland"
tags:
  - "Trade Alliances"
---
Why a weight-loss drug could become a geopolitical bargaining chip

  
Can a weight-loss drug become a weapon of war? Once, that question might have seemed absurd. No longer. Earlier this year, when US President Donald Trump offered to buy Greenland from Denmark, online rumours circulated that the Danish government might encourage Novo Nordisk, the Danish company behind the diabetes and weight-loss drugs Ozempic and Wegovy, to retaliate with a 500 per cent price hike for American customers. That was a spoof. But earlier this month Lars Fruergaard Jørgensen, its canny CEO, warned that Trump’s trade war could lead to “increased pricing” for the drugs, amid other competitive threats to its fortunes. And one colourful idea floating around the Trump ecosystem is that the drugs could be a bargaining chip in future negotiations with Denmark, perhaps by pushing for a US acquisition. After all, many American “voters care about Ozempic,” as one observer tells me, noting that another possible tactic would be for the US to demand a krone revaluation, to keep Denmark linked to dollar-based finance. Will this happen? I find it hard to believe, and plenty of factors might yet derail Trump. But in the meantime, investors parsing the world should pay attention to four practical points. First: as Elon Musk noted this week, the so-called “Overton Window” — or frame for policy ideas — is widening fast; nothing can be ruled out. Second, Trump’s team want to expand their negotiating leverage by mixing economic, financial, trade, tech and national security issues in a manner alien to anyone trained in a 20th-century MBA programme — or, for that matter, economics. Third, some of Trump’s advisers have a mental vision of great power rivalry that feels uncannily familiar to students of Central Asian history (of which I myself was one). Nuuk, Greenland’s capital, is the 21st-century version of Samarkand or Kabul — and Ozempic akin to saffron. Recommended Arctic Supremacy 10 days with the US Coast Guard on the new Arctic front lines This explains why Trump has focused on the frozen north, with its minerals, future transit routes and long borders with Russia and China. So, too, his ambivalence about Nato. Or as the so-called Dark Enlightenment blogger Curtis Yarvin noted in a recent plea to Trump: “The assumptions of [US] foreign policy must not be inherited from the age of ‘national security’ [so] the organisations that execute this foreign policy should probably also not be inherited from the 20th century.” Yarvin is considered an extremist, anti-democrat by many mainstream observers. But he has reportedly influenced figures such as JD Vance, Trump’s vice-president. So he is worth reading — not least because he has also declared that “the more power you use, the more power you have . . . you have to keep using power, otherwise you lose it”. That highlights a fourth point: institutions such as Nato, and smaller countries, suddenly look vulnerable. Just consider the recent ritual humiliation of Volodymyr Zelenskyy, Ukraine’s president, in the Oval Office. This may be a template for how bullying gets ratcheted up. Can those threatened fight back? This week Jens Stoltenberg, the former head of Nato, and Mette Frederiksen, the prime minister of Denmark, insisted they could. “In diplomacy you have to spend the most time with people you disagree with,” Stoltenberg observed, following the release of a fly-on-the-wall documentary about him called Facing War. “We have to be prepared . . . that America may reduce their presence in Europe.” Or as Frederiksen echoed: “Diplomacy is about politics and values. So if something happens like [the incident] in the Oval Office, you have to go back and continue.” However Nato’s problem is that its sway rests on mindset as much as military hardware — meaning that its deterrence power will crumble if there is disunity. If the White House takes Yarvin’s advice, bullying might get worse, and be directed not just towards Denmark, but also even more towards countries such as Canada, which has the geographic (mis)fortune to lie between America and the frozen north. Indeed, I am told that Trump’s advisers are mulling the Canadian dollar (as well as the krone) as a target for revaluation. So Novo Nordisk’s investors should watch closely. And many might also join western diplomats in praying, as one put it to me, that “there is a change in the US midterms”. But if you want some light relief for now, this week almost 300,000 Danes signed a “Denmarkification” petition entitled “Let’s Buy California from Trump — Denmark’s next big adventure.” This calls for a $1tn fund to bring “hygge (coziness) to Hollywood”, “bike lanes to Beverly Hills” and to put Mickey Mouse in a Viking helmet. A joke? Yes. But it is not “just” funny. Western voters — and investors — are facing a level of geopolitical flux they have never seen in their lives before, and in which fact and wild fiction seem to blur each day.